release: add 4.12.0 release notes (#1582)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/core/releases/4.12.0.md

---
title: "4.12.0 release notes"
linkTitle: "4.12.0"
weight:
description: >
relevantLinks: >
toc_hide: true
---

## Known issues

Check the repository for the [latest known issues](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3A%22Affects%3A+4.12.0%22).

## Upgrade notes

### Breaking changes

None.

### UI/UX changes

This release includes changes to the user interface which will improve the learnability of the CHT by aligning with the look and feel of other android apps. Below is a summary of the changes, all of which were covered in the [July Round-up Call](https://youtube.com/watch?v=NSFRQt378Ls&t=460s):
- [Update to the overall CHT app Navigation experience](https://forum.communityhealthtoolkit.org/t/the-ui-evolution-of-the-cht/3515#navigation-6)

> - Added the ability to temporarily [opt out](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/building/guides/updates/feature-flags/) of the new Navigation experience 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added the ability to temporarily [opt out]({{< relref "building/guides/updates/feature-flags" >}}) of the new Navigation experience 
```

Minor, but I think we should use the short-code versions of these links to other pages on the docs site. The main benefit, as I understand it, is that at build time Hugo will detect if the shortcode link is broken (e.g. if the page was moved or removed).

In Desktop, the Navigation bar and menu option have moved to the left side of the screen. In Mobile, the Navigation bar has moved to the bottom of the screen and the menu option has moved to the left.

{{< figure src="../images/4.12.0-new-nav.png" >}}

Like we’ve done for several previous stages of the UI evolution, it is possible to temporarily “opt out” of the new UI via a permission. The Navigation changes can be disabled by giving users the `can_view_old_navigation` permission. **This capability/permission will be removed in a future release.**

Users with the `can_view_old_navigation` permission will see the previous version of the UI as illustrated below.

{{< figure src="../images/4.12.0-old-nav.png" >}}

### Removal of opt out for Filter, Search, and Old Action Bar

To make way for the updated Navigation, it was necessary to remove the previous opt out capabilities. These two permissions are no longer recognized by the CHT.

> - `can_view_old_filter_and_search` (introduced in [3.17.0](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/core/releases/3.17.0/#update-to-search-and-filters-on-the-contacts-and-reports-tabs))
> - `can_view_old_action_bar` (introduced in [4.2.0](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/core/releases/4.2.0/#floating-action-button))
> While it’s not necessary to remove these permissions from your [Roles](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/building/reference/app-settings/user-roles/), they will no longer be recognized by the CHT and users will automatically see the updates they relate to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `can_view_old_filter_and_search` (introduced in [3.17.0]({{< relref "core/releases/3.17.0#update-to-search-and-filters-on-the-contacts-and-reports-tabs" >}}))
- `can_view_old_action_bar` (introduced in [4.2.0]({{< relref "core/releases/4.2.0#floating-action-button" >}}))
While it’s not necessary to remove these permissions from your [Roles]({{< relref "building/reference/app-settings/user-roles" >}}), they will no longer be recognized by the CHT and users will automatically see the updates they relate to.
```

> ### Added monitoring api fields
> 
> To help better track and understand data usage in the CHT, additional fields were added to the monitoring api including
> - `fragmentation`
> - `sizes.active`
> - `sizes.file`
> 
> To Learn more about the monitoring api visit the [Doc site page](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/building/reference/api/#monitoring)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Added storage metrics to monitoring api

To help better track and understand data usage in the CHT, additional metrics were added to the [monitoring api]({{< relref "building/reference/api#monitoring" >}}). The api now reports the following size values for each of the tracked databases and their view indexes:

- `active` - The size in bytes of live data inside the database/view.
- `file` - The size in bytes of the database/view as stored on disk.

In addition, the `fragmentation` metric value reported for each database will now factor in the disk usage of all the view indexes for that database. This means that the `fragmentation` value will more accurately represent the total fragmentation of the data in that database.

Support for tracking these new metrics has been added to [CHT Watchdog]({{< relref "core/overview/watchdog" >}}) as of the [`1.16.0` release](https://github.com/medic/cht-watchdog/releases/tag/1.16.0).
```
